blog article on legacy data part2 (#1123)
flowforge/website: src/blog/2023/09/modernize-your-legacy-industrial-data-part2.md

---
title: Modernize your legacy industrial data. Part 2.
subtitle: A deeper dive with into making the most of legacy industrial data from the likes of Modbus and older, non IIoT protocols and putting it to work in an IIoT world.
description: A deeper dive with into making the most of legacy industrial data from the likes of Modbus and older, non IIoT protocols and putting it to work in an IIoT world.
date: 2023-09-17
authors: ["stephen-mclaughlin"]
image: "/blog/2023/09/images/industrial-legacy-data-blog-image.png"
tags:
    - posts
    - node-red
    - community
---

> In an article published recently, I introduced the topic of working with legacy industrial data from the likes of Modbus and older, non IIoT protocols and putting it to work in an IIoT world. 

Reviewer: Let's link the previous one here and remove the line just before the more fold 🙂

Author: Sorry ZJ, I am not entirely certain what you are asking here. Could you clarify or suggest please ZJ? 
_(PS, in case you didn't spot it, there is a link to the previous article in this section already)_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [part 1 of this series](modernize-your-legacy-industrial-data-part2.md) for the introduction and overview.) published recently, I introduced the topic of working with legacy industrial data from the likes of Modbus and older, non IIoT protocols and putting it to work in an IIoT world. 
```

And remove line 19? I feel like 19 breaks the flow of the article, while we can link in this line

We looked at some of the challenges and how Node-RED with `node-red-contrib-buffer-parser` node can help. 

In this article, I will dive a little deeper into the topic and discuss some of the finer details. I hope to demonstrate a smarter approach that can make a huge difference to data accuracy, performance and maintainability while significantly reducing developer time. Not only that, ending with a no-code solution.

See the [previous article](modernize-your-legacy-industrial-data-part2.md) for the introduction and overview.

<!--more-->

> ### In the beginning...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Obtaining Industrial Data
```

> 
> See the [previous article](modernize-your-legacy-industrial-data-part2.md) for the introduction and overview.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Remove separate link

> In order to generate IIoT data from legacy systems we first need to _grab_ that data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to convert the data from legacy systems to IIoT native data we first need to _grab_ that data.
```

Author: Applied change _similar_ to suggestion in [38834ba](https://github.com/flowforge/website/pull/1123/commits/38834bab3664f688aade56cdaebbe0c7175a7d9d)

But getting the data is just the beginning, it's the methods and considerations you need to make that can make the difference between success and failure. Read on...

### Data consistency

An often overlooked aspect of working with legacy industrial data is the consistency of the data being read. In the context of this article, consistency means that the multiple values that make up a related data set are read in a way that they are all valid to one another at the point in time it was read.

Let's take a look at a simple example. We have a process PLC recording production metrics and wish to get this data from its Modbus interface for reporting and decision making. The PLC has 5 values that we need to read:

| Register | Value | Description            | Data Type  |
| -------- | ----- | ---------------------- | ---------- |
| 1, 2     | 10    | Part Count             | UINT32     |
| 3, 4     | 2.5   | Cycle Time (sec)       | UINT32/100 |
| 5, 6     | 30    | Production Time (sec)  | UINT32/100 |
| 7, 8     | 20    | Run Time (sec)         | UINT32/100 |
| 9, 10    | 11    | Stoppage Time (sec)    | UINT32/100 |

> If the total production time is 30 seconds and the run time is 20 seconds, then the stoppage time should be 10 seconds. But it is not. It is 11 seconds. This is because the data is not consistent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the total production time is 30 seconds and the run time is 20 seconds, then the stoppage time should be 10 seconds. But it might not be, it could be 11 seconds. This is because the data is not consistent.
```

Author: Not sure about this suggestion. I was describing the actual data in the table above, so in that instance it actually was 11.  I understand why you raised this so will attempt to clarify.

Author: Applied change to clarify relationship between the sentence and sample data in [38834ba](https://github.com/flowforge/website/pull/1123/commits/38834bab3664f688aade56cdaebbe0c7175a7d9d)

_Image 2: individual reads with data processing_
![Image showing 10 individual reads with data processing](images/industrial-legacy-data-pt2-10polls.gif)

Yippie! We have the data, it works, we publish it to MQTT, job done. Right?

Unfortunately, no. The data is inconsistent.

#### So whats the big deal?

Inconsistent data is not useful data and errors can get compounded over time. This leads to bad decisions being made and a loss of confidence in the data. Ultimately, this leads to the data being ignored and the opportunities to make improvements are lost. Loss of improvements means loss of money!

Not only that, from a developer or maintainers perspective, it has many problems:
1. Lots of error prone manual configuration (yes, I made several mistakes while creating the example)
2. Hard coded register addresses
3. Duplication
4. Inextensible - what if we need to read more registers?
5. Inconsistent data - as discussed above
6. Slow - each read takes time
7. Inefficient use of network bandwidth - each read requires a request and response packet

#### How can we make the data consistent?

The most obvious solution is to stop the PLC before reading the data.

> This is of course a terrible idea as it will stop the process.

Reviewer: I agree it's a terrible idea, but the phrasing is a bit aggressive for me.

Can we go more tong in cheek with

```suggestion
Though your boss won't like it as it will stop the manufacturing process.
```

Author: I am curious as to what makes you find that aggressive ZJ.  I normally recognise aggressive language and self correct (since I never mean to be aggressive) so I am genuinely curious as to the thoughts in your head here (for personal growth, nothing more 👼 )

I will of course update this but to let you into my head a little here: I described it as terrible (as we both agree it is) but not for a "terrible/bad-person" reason but a "terrible/strong-mistake" reason AKA - "really, don't do this!".  😃

Author: Applied change _similar_ to suggestion in [38834ba](https://github.com/flowforge/website/pull/1123/commits/38834bab3664f688aade56cdaebbe0c7175a7d9d)

The next best thing is for the PLC to sample and store the data in an internal memory buffer, waiting, unchanging, to be collected. Unfortunately, this too is not always possible either due to limited in-house skills, locked down PLCs or simply because the PLC does not have the memory to store the data.

> The next best thing to do is to read relative data as quickly as possible and, in one block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next best thing to do is to read relative data as quickly as possible and in one block.
```

The first, instinctive approach is to fan out the data and process it individually:

_Image 5: block reads, individual processing_
![image showing 1 modbus poll with individual processing](images/industrial-legacy-data-pt2-1poll-fixed.gif)

This may be fine for a handful of registers but it soon becomes unwieldy and unmaintainable.

But lets be smarter about this. We know that the data is consistent and we know that we can read it in one go. So, lets process it in one go too:

_Image 6: block reads, smart processing, no-code solution_
![image showing 1 modbus poll with smart processing](images/industrial-legacy-data-pt2-1poll-extensible.gif)

#### Wrap up

I hope this article has given you some food for thought and some ideas on not only simplifying your journey to IIoT but also the pitfalls to avoid along the way.

A parting thought, there are times when the data is not contiguous. There are ways to deal with this too but that is for another day.

> PS, I will post the flows used for the examples above in the comments below. If you have any questions or comments, please reach out there too.

Reviewer: This is neat, great to get engagement!

```suggestion
P.S. I will post the flows used for the examples above in the comments below. If you have any questions or comments, please reach out there too.

```
